An annual Agriculture Department survey confirmed Thursday that a deadening drought will curtail the fall corn harvest by a third or more, resulting in higher retail food prices for months and years to come.
However, government officials said bountiful crops in recent years has built stockpiles so high the United States need not fear actual shortages on grocery shelves and can even continue exporting food.
The report came hours after President Reagan signed a $3.9 billion relief bill.
Overall, the department's Agricultural Statistics Board put total U.S. crop production at 88 percent of the 1977 average, a scale used to compare output from year to year.
That matched the low 1983 reading, when sharp cutbacks in government acreage programs, along with drought, reduced crop production sharply.
The corn crop is expected to average 78.5 bushels per harvested acre, down from 119.4 bushel per acre last year, a record year-to-year decline of 13 percent.
Corn is the largest and most important crop grown by American farmers and, as a feed ingredient, is essential to the production of meat, poultry and dairy products.
Assistant Secretary Ewen M. Wilson, the department's chief economist, said the drought may add one percent to the cost of food this year, two percent next year.
``Today's reports confirm that the drought has had a major impact on this year's crops,'' Wilson told reporters.
``But because of large pre-season stocks, total supplies are enough in most cases to assure and adequate food supply at home, satisfy foreign customers and meet our food-aid commitments.''
Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, said in a statement, ``Today's crop report confirms our fears about the impacts of this summer's tragic drought.
Fortunately, it appears we will have enough stocks to make it through this marketing year.''
The USDA's grim news came hours after President Reagan on Thursday signed a $3.9 billion disaster relief bill aimed at helping drought-stricken farmers recover.
``This bill isn't as good as rain,'' Reagan said to the nation's farmers.
``But it will tide you over until normal weather and your own skills permit you to return to your accustomed role.''
The soybean harvest was estimated at 1.47 billion bushels, down 23 percent from 1.9 billion bushels produced last year.
Prospects last spring called for about 1.88 billion bushels, and the July projection was 1.65 billion bushels.
Production of all wheat was indicated at 1.82 billion bushels, down 13 percent from 2.1 billion produced in 1987.
Winter wheat production was estimated at 1.55 billion bushels, down 1 percent from last year.
But durum and the other spring varieties, which are produced in the hard-hit northern plains, showed sharp declines.
He also said the United States is ``looking at an export situation that is not as good as it was a year ago.''
He said production abroad would have to take up the slack in world food supply caused by the drought.
``Our figures here today would indicate that food production in other countries has not been cut that much,'' he said.
There remained a possibility that the United States would import some soybeans this year, Wilson said.
He scoffed at any suggestion, however, that the United States may have lost its capacity to produce sizeable crop surpluses.
